Good morning, everybody.
9:00 a.m.
after the party.
Not too bad.
I'm sure we'll get some
stragglers coming in.
Anyway, I want to make one program note.
If you had to choose between this session
and the GL shading language session,
which unfortunately is at the same time
because we had a last minute scramble,
after both sessions,
after this session and
the GL one upstairs,
everyone's going to be back in the
graphics and media lab if you had
questions about that and had to pick.
Anyway, I'm really excited about what
we have for you this morning.
We're going to be talking
about Quartz Composer,
which is a new tool on the developer DVD.
Pretty exciting way to play around
with all the technology we'll have.
So without further ado,
I'll bring up Pierre-Olivié Latour.
Good morning everyone.
Welcome to the Quartz
Composer WWDC session.
So the first thing we are
going to look at is obviously,
what is Quartz Composer?
So it's a brand new tool
we're introducing in Tiger,
a developer tool,
an exciting visual programming tool.
And what you do with it is
you create compositions,
which basically are little
programs that somehow process
and render graphical data.
Quartz Composer is able to actually
package a bunch of technologies
into one single environment.
And you have technologies like
OpenGL Quartz 2D or brand new
technologies we're introducing in Tiger,
like Core Video or Core Image,
everything in real time, from editing,
preview, to debugging.
And the compositions you create
are really easy to integrate
into your applications.
We provide an IB palette,
and the system is completely
compatible with the Cocoa bindings.
The first thing I'm going to show you
are some simple examples of compositions.
Can we see demo machine number two,
please?
Thank you.
So here we have simple
but typical compositions.
It contains a mix of 2D and 3D elements.
Like in that case,
we have a 3D cube that is
rotating with some text on it.
And in the background,
we have some simple text that
is being blurred in real time
using some core image filters.
Okay, I'm going to let you read to the
end of the text if you are able to.
This composition is actually-- at
the foundation of it is a simple
2D image that was-- to which
were applied a bunch of filters,
and at the end you opted that completely
different result from the original image,
which is animated with the time.
And it's interesting to see that
the quality of what you generate
with Squares Composer using the
underlying technologies we have--
graphic technologies we have in
your printing system-- is very,
very, very good.
And it's running very fast.
You might not see it,
but at the bottom left corner
we got a frame rate counter,
and we're running at 60 frames
per second right now because
we're syncing to the display.
But it would actually run even faster.
This composition is interesting because
we don't have any image as its source.
It's basically generated from scratch
using Core Image filters that are
assembled and animated with time.
And once again, you can see that the
quality is very good,
and it's completely per-pixel computed.
This release of Quartz Composer
also allows you to do some simple
3D animations which could be
interactive and respond to the mouse.
I'm using the mouse right now to
actually move around in the 3D world.
This other composition is actually a
slideshow where we have a folder full of
images and the composition is responsible
for putting them on screen and computing
the transition between the images.
The last composition I want to
show you is a composition that
gets data from the outside world,
namely the Internet.
So this composition is getting the
RSS feed from the Apple website
and showing the hot news
with a simple text animation.
Back to slides, please.
So what are we going to learn today?
Basically five points.
We're going to have some
theory at the beginning,
basically the Quartz Composer concepts.
Then we're going to look
at the application itself.
We're going to go through a tutorial
so that you can see a typical
example of building a composition.
And obviously we'll look at how to play
back compositions in your applications.
At the base of the
Quartz Composer concept,
we have what we call patches.
Patches are basic,
simple processing units.
Their role in life is simply to
execute and produce some results.
This result can be sent
to their output ports,
which we are simply
going to call outputs,
or to some rendering destinations.
Then to control these patches,
you pass parameters-- input parameters,
actually-- through their
input ports of the patches.
We're going to call input
ports simply inputs.
So we can say that patches are a
little function that produce some
result according to a bunch of
parameters and the current time.
The ports,
the input ports and output ports
of the patches are actually typed,
which means the kind of
data you pass does matter.
We can pass some values
like simple numbers,
Boolean values, or strings, even colors.
And we can also pass around
complex objects like bitmaps,
OpenGL textures, or Core Image images.
Let's look at some example patches.
The first one we're going
to look at is the LFO patch,
which stands for low
frequency oscillator.
The goal of this patch is actually
to produce a wave on its output,
which is determined by the current time,
the period of the wave,
the wave type – so that would be,
for example,
a square wave or a sinusoidal
wave – and it's sampled.
This other patch we have here
does not have any input parameter.
It doesn't need any.
Its simple role is to produce on its
outputs the current mouse position,
the X and Y coordinates.
And the last patch, the sprite patch,
does not have any output ports because
it is rendering to a destination.
And in that case,
this patch is actually drawing a
quad at a given X and Y position and
with a given color and texture on it.
So how do we put everything together?
Well, let's say we have kind of workspace
and we put all the patches on it,
patches we want to use.
These patches are going to
have some inputs and outputs.
We can build some connections between
the inputs and outputs so that,
for example, the patch in the middle
is retrieving the data,
its input data from the
other patches on the left.
So we can say that the patch on the
further right is actually pulling the
data from the patches on the left.
So what we build here is a
kind of simple data flow model.
And this is at the core of
the Quartz Composer concept.
We're going to put these patches
into actually a kind of macro patch.
And when it becomes interesting is that,
for example, the patch we have at the
middle of the macro patch,
the big one,
could actually be itself another
macro patch made of several patches.
And some of these patches may themselves
be other macro patches and so on.
So what you end up with is
a hierarchical patch tree.
Now, if we call the top patch,
the top macro patch,
at the top of the tree the root patch,
then the entire patch tree and the
entire data flow it describes is what
we call the Quartz Composer composition.
Now I'm going to show you
the application itself,
because that's enough theory for now.
So you will find the application
into the developer folder,
applications, graphic tools,
Quartz Composer.
So it's a kind of standard Cocoa looking
application where you can work on
multiple compositions at the same time.
And in that case,
we have one document per composition.
So let's look in detail
at this document window.
What we have here is the workspace
where actually we put the
patches and we interconnect them.
On the right, we have the list of patches
we can actually use.
They are pre-sorted by categories
so that it's easier to find them.
For example, some of them are going to be
controlling the objects by
sending data for their position,
for example.
Some other patches are going
to be used to import data,
like images from files
or from a video camera.
Then we have several numeric
patches that are used to perform
some mathematical operations.
And then we also have rendering patches,
because we want to render
something eventually.
At the bottom of the list you will find
several categories that start with a dot.
And these are all the
Core Image filters which are natively
supported by Quartz Composer.
So you can find here all
the compositing filters,
distortion effects, generators,
and so on.
[Transcript missing]
But you will notice that
I don't see my sprite anymore.
The reason is that since we're
performing drawing operations,
we need to define which order
the operations are performed.
And in that case,
you will notice on the top right
corner of this kind of patches
that they have a number indicating
in which order they are executed.
We have number one here,
number two there,
and obviously we want to do the inverse,
which is rendering first – I mean,
clearing first the rendering
area and then drawing a sprite.
For that,
you display the contextual menu on
the sprite you're interested in,
and you can change its rendering layer,
which basically defines the order.
And now it's working fine.
The next step, I'm going to use the third
patch we introduced earlier,
which is the LFO patch.
So the LFO is outputting a
wave according to the time,
and I'm going to drive the width
of the sprite with that wave.
So now we can see
something that is animated.
I might want to also drive the
height of the sprite with that wave,
but do some other operations on it.
The way you would do it, for example,
is use a mat patch.
And I'm going to take the value
from the output of the LFO,
send it through the MAT patch,
and get the next result and connect
it to the height of the sprite.
Now, we've seen so far how you connect
patches and have values being
transmitted dynamically through patches,
between patches.
But, of course,
you might not want to always do that
and have some values defined statically.
So how do you do that?
Well, you can simply double-click
on an input input,
which is going to bring up an editor,
and then you can set
the value on the input.
So in that case, that's a color input,
so we get a color well,
and I can then pick up some green color,
for example.
Then another way to edit the parameters
is to show the inspector there and
go to the input parameters pane,
where you can see all
the parameters at once.
You will notice that parameters that are
defined by -- because they are connected
to some outputs are not editable,
obviously.
And what I might want
to do there is simply,
I don't know,
define -- take the -- force the sprite
not to go below 0.5 for its width,
for example.
For its height, I mean.
And to go above 0.5.
And now we've got something like this.
Let's go back to the slides, please.
Okay,
we still have some theory to look at.
Can we go back to the slides, please?
Thanks.
So we've seen earlier that we have
what we call a hierarchical patch tree.
Now we are going to have a rough
look of-- regarding how exactly it
is being evaluated by the system.
So at the top of the tree,
we have a macro patch,
which is basically like the root patch.
And then, during evaluation,
this patch is being traversed.
And each time-- and the system is
going to execute the sub-patches that
are contained into this macro patch.
And each time one of these
sub-patches is a macro patch itself,
it's going to be traversed.
And all its sub-patches
are being executed,
and so on and so on,
so the tree is traversed upside down.
Now what exactly happens when we
are inside a macro patch and we
need to execute the sub-patches?
The first thing to know is that not
all patches are kind of born equal.
We have consumer patches.
These are the essential,
the most important patches.
They are the ones which render something.
For right now,
they're all rendering something
to the destination area,
which is going to be like a screen
or a preview rendering window.
Each time you render a
frame of the compositions,
they're going to be executed.
They're executed in a defined order,
as we've seen earlier,
and you can look at the order by looking
at the number on the top right corner.
And they actually are the one which
pull the data from the other patches.
What kind of other patches do we have?
Well, we have the processor patches,
which are kind of slave patches.
They run on demand,
and they simply execute to
when their inputs have changed,
and they need their
outputs to be updated.
The system only executes
them kind of in a lazy mode.
The third type of patches
we have are providers,
and this one's – their role
is to get data from outside
sources into the system.
In that example,
it would be a mouse patch.
And they also run on demand,
which means only when the
– their outputs are needed.
Okay, so now, how is that simple example
going to actually execute?
As we said earlier,
the consumer patches are
the most important patches,
and they're the one driving everything.
So they get executed first, and first,
we have the clear patch that executes.
Then we have the sprite patch
that's going to execute.
But this one is interesting because some
of its inputs are actually defined by the
fact they are connected to other outputs,
to some outputs of other patches.
So before running the sprite patch,
the system must make sure
that all the inputs that are
connected have up-to-date values.
So first,
it's going to execute the mouse patch so
that it's updating its outputs that get
copies to the inputs of the sprite patch.
And then we have the
LFO patch that is executing,
and eventually the MAT patch.
Now all the values on the
sprite are up-to-date,
and we can execute the sprite patch.
Let's go back to the demo, please.
So I'm going to show you a little more
about the evaluation system and how you
can look at it inside the application.
So here we have a composition
that is far more advanced than
the one we looked at earlier.
Let's look at it for
a second full screen.
So it's a kind of DVD sim, if you want,
that was built using Quartz Composer.
And we have live video playing,
being masked in real time,
some real time Core Image filters also,
and some flying hearts and everything.
And everything is mostly
completely editable.
For example,
if I want to change the title,
I just double click on a
string input and I say,
um, now, WWDC 2004.
Okay, now it's very good.
As we said earlier,
we have some – it's a patch tree.
The entire composition is a patch tree.
The way you can look at it
is by displaying the browser.
And here you can see
we have the root patch,
and I can look at the background patch,
the flying heart patch, title and menu.
Some of them are going to contain
other sub-patches and so on.
Back to the root patch.
And let's look at the background patch,
which is a macro that was created
to simplify the – so that you
don't end up with thousands
of patches at the root level.
You can create macros and put them
in order to clean up your workspace.
We're going to see that
later in the tutorial.
So let's look at the exact
evaluation of the system.
In that case,
we would have some movie coming in,
which is our standard
DV progressive 24 frames per second.
It's going through this patch here,
the movie positioning,
which actually it's not the real name,
but I renamed it,
in order simply to put the movie
at the correct position on screen.
Then it goes through a series of filters
to display – to correct the gamma,
to adjust the color controls.
[Transcript missing]
And on top of that,
we add a kind of white mask
that is going to be used to
generate a hello inside the ring.
And eventually,
when we combine everything,
we end up with our
final background image.
Now, you can see that this is a very –
the tooltip system is very powerful
because it allows you to see exactly
what's happening inside the data flow.
But we can even do better.
If you press the debug button here,
what's going to happen is that it's going
to colorize the patches depending on the
way they are currently being executed.
We have three colors.
Green means the patch is currently
activated and is running.
"Red" means a patch is not even being
activated or running or anything at all.
For example,
if I just drag and drop a patch here,
nobody's using it.
So it's just red.
It's useless.
Then orange patches are the
ones that are being activated,
but they're not running.
Why is that?
Because the data here is never changing.
So the system is obviously smart
enough to only re-execute the parts
of the data flow that are changing.
Which is the case here,
because the movie images that
arrives at the entry of the
patch is changing every frame.
So this enter a pipe here
needs to be re-evaluated.
Now, let's look at what happens
if I change the color here.
[Transcript missing]
So up to the tutorial.
This simple tutorial is going
to take us through building
a composition from scratch.
And what we are going to build
is a composition that's rendered
a simple real-time glow effect.
And we're going to learn through
that how to build such a glow
effect using Core Image Filters,
and also how to render a simple
animated cube that we're going
to feed through that glow effect,
because we're going to be rendering
and create a texture out of it.
And we're going to obtain the result
that you see at the bottom of the
screen with the original cube,
and then the cube with the
glow effect on top of it.
So how would we do a simple glow effect?
It's only a two-step process.
We have the original image,
and then on top of it,
we put a blurred version.
We add a blurred version.
So we obtain this nice glowing effect.
So let's get started.
So I'm going to launch Quartz Composer,
a startup with a brand new composition.
First thing I'm going to do is
import an image to work with.
So I go to the generators
and I use bitmap with file.
There in the inspector,
if I go to the settings pane,
I can click on the import file
button and pick up an image file.
In that case, this one.
Then the next thing I want to do is
actually render this image on screen.
We can get started.
Here we go.
For that,
I'm going to use the image renderer,
which gives us extensive control over
rendering a simple image on screen.
And I'm simply going to connect
the bitmap output to the image
input of the image renderer.
The connection is red,
meaning there is some conversion going
on because the bitmap with file is
generating kind of a bitmap object.
And the image renderer
accepts the core image image.
But the system is smart enough to
do conversions between the objects
or the various types you may be
transmitting whenever it's possible.
So the red is just to indicate
that a conversion is occurring,
is happening.
Otherwise,
you would get like a green connection.
We're not displaying the entire image
because the image renderer gives
us specific control over which part
of the image we want to display.
The reason is that because
it's rendering core images,
core images may be infinite.
And you might often end up with infinite
images when you apply some filters.
So in that case,
you really need to specify,
I want to render this area of the image.
So we could specify manually
here in input parameters
that our original image is
"1024 by 768, so that will do for now."
Then to achieve our blur effect,
we said we needed to use a
blur and to add that on top
of the original rendering.
So for that,
I'm going to use the Gaussian Blur,
which is into the Core Image filters,
and the Addition Compositing Patch.
All I have to do is connect the bitmap
to the input of the Gaussian Blur.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, and once I'm done with my blur,
I want to add it to the original image.
Now we got our nice glow effect.
But it's if we look at it full
screen what I notice is that it's
very bright and one way to fix
that is simply to insert a color
adjustment and cheat by playing on
the gamma before we apply the blur.
So I'm going to insert a gamma
adjust before the blur and
then I can play with the okay
"The power on the gamma correction
to actually kind of fix the
brightness of the glow effect.
Now it's much better."
So that will be our first
part of this tutorial.
Second part is going to be to create
some animated background because
it's obviously more interesting to
have our glow effect being applied
to something that is animating,
that's something that
is completely static.
So first thing we want to do
is we're going to just create
a brand new composition,
as usual clear the screen,
and then render a cube on top of it.
The cube has several parameters,
and you can control position
orientations and the width,
the dimensions of every axis and so on.
First thing we are going to do
is simply change the dimensions
to make it a little smaller.
"So, 0.75, we do the trick,
and then we want to have this
cube simply animate with time.
One way to do that is,
would be to use the, let's see,
interpolation patch,
which simply interpolates between
two values on a given duration.
And I'm going to control with
that the X and Y rotation.
Okay.
I want the interpolation
to start at zero.
In that case,
we're going to be in degrees.
Finish at 360 degrees over, let's say,
10 seconds.
And I want interpolation to loop.
Now we got our nice rotating cube.
Next step is to obviously add a
texture on the faces of the cube.
So I'm going to go back to generators and
use bitmap with file and import an image.
So I should have one for this.
Here we go.
Nice brick texture.
And to display this kind of brand
new image on the faces of the cube,
I simply have to connect the bitmap
to the various faces of the cube.
[Transcript missing]
So it's not very realistic.
So let's look at the environment
patches we have here.
And one of them is the lighting.
So we're going to drag and drop it there.
We don't see any difference yet.
The reason is that you need to
specify how the lighting is going
to influence the patch tree.
Which patches on the workspace here are
going to be influenced by the lighting.
You might not want all the
patches to be specified,
to be affected,
so the way we do it is by using
the fact that the lighting
patch is a macro patch itself.
And it's only going to affect the
patches that are inside this macro patch.
One way to navigate through the
patch tree we've seen earlier
is to use the browser there.
Another way is simply to double
click on a title bar on a patch.
And then you can go inside it.
And if you want to go up one level,
you just click on the Edit Parent button.
So what we're going to
do is just cut this.
Go into the lighting patch and patch it.
I mean, past it.
Here we go.
So now we've got our cube,
which is lighter than
rotating and everything.
That's going to be part two.
All right, now how do we put these
two compositions together?
What we need to do is produce
some kind of image with the
rotating cube that we're going
to feed through the glow effect.
And it's convenient because we
have a patch specifically for that,
which is called – which
is a generator patch,
and which generates a texture
with what is inside itself.
[Transcript missing]
So it's important to
notice that this tool,
even if it's attempting to abstract all
the various technologies it encompasses,
it's not hiding everything.
So you can still have access to the
low-level settings most of the time.
So in that case,
I'm going to use a rectangle
texture and I also want
[Transcript missing]
So now, onto this texture,
I'm going to have my rotating cube.
And the next step is obviously to
fit that texture through the glow
effect instead of the original image.
[Transcript missing]
You might want to have these
values to be defined automatically.
One way to do that is to use
a tool we have around here,
which is the, for example,
texture dimensions.
As the name implies,
you simply pass in a texture
and you can get the width and
height in pixels of that texture.
So now it's set automatically and
we have our nice glowing effect
that is applied on the cube.
And by playing with
the power of the gamma,
you can see the effect of the glow.
If I go full screen,
you're going to notice it's
not running extremely smooth.
The reason is that, remember,
our original texture on which
we applied the Gaussian blur
is the same size as the screen.
So in that case, that's going to be 1290
by 960 or something.
And it's a lot of data to
be processed by the GPU.
Because computing a blur is
a very expensive operation.
So there are ways to optimize that.
I'm not going to go into
details for this example.
I'm simply going to show you the
end result of that optimization.
This is the version you're
actually going to find in the
examples provided on the Tiger DVD,
the example compositions.
So this one is the final result.
And it's very smooth,
and we got a nice glow effect.
Basically, the difference with what we
just built is after the texture,
after the step where we generate
the texture with the cube,
we basically downsample the texture
to one that is always 256 x 256.
And we feed that downsampled
version of the texture through the
Gaussian blur and the glow effect.
And because it's only 256 by 256,
it's going to be very
fast to be computed.
Back to the slides, please.
So now it's time to look at how we
are going to play the compositions.
There are three possibilities.
You can use the QC view,
which is a customized NSView we
provide with Quartz Composer.
And you can use it directly
in Interface Builder.
You can do kind of advanced playback,
still in Interface Builder,
using the QC Patch Controller,
to use the bindings.
And then the final way of playing
back a composition is kind of
the hard way where you have more
control over the composition.
And that's going to be using
the low-level QC renderer class.
And you have to use
that programmatically.
Back to Dima Mashin, please.
So let's launch Interface Builder.
The first time you launch it,
you're going to have to add
the Quartz Composer palette,
which is not loaded by default.
So for that you show the
preferences of Interface Builder.
You go to the palette area and you
simply click on add and you will find the
Quartz Composer palette into developer,
extras, palettes,
and then Quartz Composer.
Okay, now we're up and running.
So let's create an empty application.
And I'm simply going to drag and drop
an instance of the Quartz Composer
view onto my window and then display
the interface builder inspector.
In the attributes pane,
you're going to find a load
button which allows us to
obviously specify the compositions
we're going to be playing back.
So I'm going to take the
optimized version of the
glow effect we just created.
And now I can just go directly to test
interface and it's up and running.
So, so far we haven't even typed a single
line of code to do all of this.
It's worth noticing it.
Okay.
That was for very simple playback.
Now, we're going to do something
that is a little more advanced
and use the Cocoa bindings.
So let's go back for a minute to
the Quartz Composer application.
And I'm going to hide Interface Builder.
Here we go.
Let's open our optimized glow.
So that's this one.
So we said at the very beginning
that the system was completely
compliant with the Cocoa bindings.
That means key value coding
and key value observing.
And to use bindings, you need to use,
obviously, keys to specify the objects.
When you look at the tooltips,
you will notice that you may not
actually see it clearly on the screen,
but the third item is the key.
Because each patch in the system,
in the patch tree,
has a unique key to identify it.
And then each input port or
output port also has a key.
And you can see these keys by
simply displaying the tooltips.
So in that case, the key for the patch is
rendering texture underscore one.
And the key for its
outputs is output texture.
So we have a way to identify
ports and patches in a tree.
What we're going to do now is,
in order to use that
composition with bindings,
we're going to transform it into
some parametrized composition.
Pierre-Olivié Latour: Okay,
let's hide this.
For example,
we might want to have to parameterize
the background color or the
intensity of the glow effect.
How would we do that?
Well,
let's go inside the rendering texture,
and the color we're interested to
change is defined by the clear patch.
So what we're going to do is bring
that input to its parent patch.
So for that, I display the contextual
menu on the patch,
and I have an option Publish Inputs.
And I can select the
inputs I'm interested in,
which in that case is Clear Color,
and specify a name for the new input,
simply Color.
Now, if I go back to the parent patch,
you will notice it now has a Color input,
which corresponds to the
Clear Color input of the Clear patch
that is inside this macro patch.
So that is called
publishing inputs/outputs.
You know an input is published
to its upper level by – because
it's going to be like a full – a
filled dot instead of an empty dot.
Let's publish-- but remember,
we said at the beginning
we have a patch tree.
And at the top of the patch tree we have
a macro patch like any other macro patch,
which means we can also publish inputs
and outputs to this macro patch.
So let's do it.
We're going to publish the
new color input we just
created to its parent patch,
which is the root patch.
We're going to keep the same name.
And now I have an input that
is at the very top level.
And it's kind of an
input of the composition.
And it's the color input.
So you can use the display pane
here to actually see all the top
level inputs of the compositions,
which can be considered like the
parameters of the composition itself.
Let's publish another input like
the intensity of the glow effect.
Let's save the result as our part 4.
Now I'm going to go back to IB.
And this time we're going to
do playback using bindings.
To use bindings, we need a controller,
and we provide one,
which is the QC patch controller,
which you instantiate simply by dragging
and dropping it onto the document window.
Remember, the way binding works is
that you have a model.
In that case,
that's going to be the composition.
Then you have several views
that are displaying – that are
interacting with that model.
And interaction is met through the
controller that is standing in the
middle and doing the intermediate.
On the controller,
I can obviously load a composition,
and I'm going to load
the one I just created.
Then I'm going to go back to my QC view,
just unload the composition
that I did on it,
and use now bindings.
So I displayed the bindings
area of the attribute inspector.
And then we have a
property that is patch,
which obviously determines the
patch that is displayed by the view.
So I'm going to bind that to the
patch controller I just created.
And I want to retrieve the
root patch of the composition
and display it on the view.
And the way you do that is simply
by using the patch controller key,
which is going to return
the root patch object.
So remember the top patch at the
top level of the composition.
So now I can test the interface
and it's the same result as before,
nothing has changed,
except we're going through bindings,
which give us a lot of flexibility.
Because what I can do now is,
for example,
pick up a slider and use that
to control our power input we
just created on the composition.
Remember, it's this one.
Okay, so the way I would do that is
simply by binding the value on the
slider to the patch controller,
then retrieve the root patch object,
and then we need to specify the key
pass to access that color input.
If we look at the Quartz Composer,
we can see that the color input,
if you look at the tooltips,
you can look at the key and you
can look also at the key for the
published version of the input.
And in that case,
it is automatically computed by the name.
So because I used the name color,
the key is conveniently set to color.
It's always going to be the case
unless you already have a color input.
And then the system is going to have
to pick up another name for you.
So we know that that input
is identified with color.
So now that gives me the input.
And what I'm interested in on
the input is the value itself.
Oh, I'm sorry.
It's not actually color.
It's power in that case.
So it's power.
And what I'm interested in is
the value on the power input.
So I add .value.
OK, now I can run the--
Oh, I need to fix the attributes of the
slider so that it goes from zero to one
only and that it is in continuous mode.
Okay, that's better.
So now I got live interaction without
typing a single line of code still
of the composition we created and
control views I have in my window.
Let's go a step further
and drive the color now.
So same principle.
You go to the Bindings area.
You bind the value to
the PatchController.
Here we go.
You retrieve the Patch object itself,
and then we say color,
to retrieve the color input, .value,
to retrieve the value on that input.
OK.
We can do better than that.
If we go back to Composition,
I can even-- There you go.
Let's get it running.
I might want to change the images,
the image I use as a texture on the cube.
So the way to do that would
be to go back to the cube.
And we would like to have
the same texture be put on
all the faces on the cube.
And here we have six
connections going on.
If you want to simplify your life--
and this happens quite often when you
want to have the same value be set
on several inputs at the same time.
And when you change one of these values,
you don't want to change, for example,
six of them each time.
For that, we provide a little tool,
which is the little utility patch,
I should say,
which is the Input Splitter.
If you display the inspector,
you can select the type
of data it's transmitting.
So the Input Splitter
is-- so in that case,
we want to transmit a texture.
And the Input Splitter is simply
transmitting the value that
arrives on its input to its output.
So I'm going to connect the six
faces to that single output,
and now I can set that value
from one single entry point
instead of setting it for six.
Obviously, I can do this,
and I get the same result as before.
But I'm going to publish that
input and name it texture.
Go back to the parent patch.
Get rid of that one,
which is useless now.
Go back to the parent patch.
It's right there,
the texture input we just created.
Publish it again to the top
level – to the upper level,
I mean.
And publishing it one last
time to the very – oops,
I published the output instead.
Here we go.
texture and keep the same name.
Now our composition has
three input parameters,
the background color,
the power of the glow effect,
and the texture on the cube.
I'm going to save that and stop it.
Go back to IB,
reload the composition on the controller.
So the composition is actually
stored inside the controller
and saved with the Nib file,
so you need to reload
it when you change it.
Now I've got my brand-new
composition still working the same.
Okay.
And in that because I'm
going to draw an NSImageView.
[Transcript missing]
So now it's up and running
and what I can do is just drop
any kind of image file there,
you know, and
We'll see our starting image,
the glow effect, you know.
Back to the slides, please.
All right, so that was playing back
a composition without even
typing a single line of code.
But what if you really
want to type some code?
Well,
you got to use the QCRenderer class.
Unfortunately,
it's still very simple to do.
So only three steps.
You need to have an NSOpenGL context
around because this entire system,
of course, Composer,
is basically running on top of
OpenGL as the primary backbone.
And then we need to have
a QCRenderer instance.
And we simply render frames
using the renderAtTime method.
Let's look at some sample code.
So what does it look like?
Well, I'm going to assume I have an
NSOpenGL view standing around,
which is called my NSOpenGL view.
And I retrieve its
NSOpenGL context from it.
Then you create an instance of the
QCRenderer using that context and
using the pass to a composition
file somewhere on your hard drive.
Now, if I want to render 10 seconds
of that composition with like 25
frames each second for one second,
you can do it in a very ugly
manner in that simple for loop.
All you have to do is call renderer.
You pass the appropriate time.
And then you need to flush the
buffers on the OpenGL context to
display what was just drawn on screen.
More in a minute about
why we need to do that.
And eventually, when you're done,
you just release the renderer,
and all the cleanup is going
to be done automatically.
Now why exactly is the renderer not
flushing the OpenGL buffers itself so
that just after a frame is rendered
you immediately see it on screen?
Well, the goal is that this allows
a lot of flexibility where you
can interleave the composition
rendering with your own OpenGL code.
And in that case,
I can do some OpenGL drawing before,
then render the composition and do
more OpenGL drawing afterwards to
create kind of underlay overlay.
So it's very easy to integrate the Quartz
Composer system into your application,
into your already existing
OpenGL application.
If you want to add some examples,
some flying logos all around
the screen or stuff like that,
you can design them easily as
compositions and then import
them into your application.
We've seen that one way to
communicate with the composition
is by doing everything using
bindings in Interface Builder.
Now you can also do
that programmatically,
and the equivalent calls would be
set value for input key or value
for output key to retrieve data
from an output of the composition.
And the way you would be doing that is
simply you pass an object corresponding
to the value and you specify the key
corresponding to the input part of
the composition or the output part.
You may have noticed earlier
that the render at time takes an
optional dictionary of arguments.
And what we are passing here,
or what we may pass here, actually,
because this is completely optional,
is the current NS event that is
being processed by the application.
And you can also pass the mouse
location in normalized coordinates.
You'll find more details into the header
corresponding to this QC renderer class.
You may wonder why you have
to actually pass this NS event
stuff and the mouse location.
Well, once again, it's optional.
But the real reason is that you might
want to have the QC renderer system
running into a command line tool or some
application where you don't have any UI.
So it's not even there.
I mean, this data is not available,
so the system cannot retrieve it.
Another reason might be that you're
running that into your application,
but you don't want the QC renderer to
actually steal events from your system.
So that's the downside of using
a low-level API like this,
is that if you're playing back
a composition that expects
user events-- and in that case,
only the mouse patch, I think,
is actually using them to obviously
detect mouse up and mouse down-- You will
need to pass these events manually.
So what kind of value should you pass
when you use set value for input key?
Well, to each type of port,
there is a corresponding
NS object you can pass.
If it's a Boolean, index, or number port,
you simply pass an NSNumber.
You obviously pass NS color
object for color port,
and so on.
What you need to pass
for now for the texture,
bitmap,
or image port is you can pass NS images,
or in the case of the image port,
you can directly pass a CI image
you obtained from some other place.
So what if I want to
control programmatically
the power of my glow effect?
Well,
the way you would do it is by simply
adding a call renderer set value.
And the power input is a number input,
so as we said earlier,
we're going to use a
simple NSNumber for that.
So we back up an NSNumber with
the value we're interested in,
and we pass that to the renderer
for the correct input key.
The system is kind of smart enough.
So you might-- actually,
you don't even need to pass an NSNumber.
Anything that will-- any
Objective-C object that is
going to respond to float value,
or double value, or int value,
this kind of stuff, is going to work.
So, back to the demo please.
I'm only going to show you a very simple
application of the QCWanderer class.
That is going to be the simple playback
application you've seen at the very
beginning of this presentation.
So this simple application is basically
playing full screen a composition.
So it's creating a full
screen in S/OPENGL context,
create a QC renderer on it,
load the composition,
and play continuously.
And it's like two pages of
code and 90% of it is actually
setting up the OpenGL context,
capturing the screen,
detecting the fact that the user
is drawing and dropping a file on
the application icon and so on.
The Quartz Composer part is
like a couple of lines of code.
Another example is this screen saver
that is now provided with Tiger.
You might have seen
during Bertrand's keynote,
I think.
So what exactly is inside a screen saver?
Well, let's have a look at it.
So I can show the original there,
which is somewhere
into the system folder.
And if you look at the package content,
go to Resources, you will find,
guess what, a composition file.
And it's right there.
So all that animation was done – oops,
it's changed the color or something.
All that kind of complex-looking screen
server was done without typing a line
of code except for the simple playback
part into the screen server bundle.
Back to the slides, please.
[Transcript missing]
The last thing I would like to show
you is kind of open some doors of
what exactly you can do with Quartz
Composer and really on the point
that it's really an open system.
And you can bring data from many,
many places.
You've seen earlier that there
were some interactive compositions,
retrieving data from the mouse,
for example, or from an RSS feed.
But we can also use
MIDI controlling devices,
video cameras, and even more,
the compositions we built
can also respond to their
execution environment somehow.
So that would be the capabilities
of the OpenGL renderer or the
dimensions of the rendering area.
So demo machine, please.
For the last demo, I'm going to still
modify our composition.
Now famous glow effect composition
and add more interactivity to it.
Okay, so let's see,
let's get a picture first.
It's not there anymore.
So, for example,
here I have a MIDI device
controller which is simply – has
a bunch of sliders and knobs,
and on each of this knob
and each of this slider,
there is a corresponding
MIDI controller ID,
and when you touch them,
it's simply sending the current value
of that control to the MIDI system.
And we have here a MIDI controller
patch I can drag and drop.
And by looking in the inspector,
specifically at the settings panel,
you can configure it completely.
And I want to listen
to my MIDI input here.
You can select several sources.
You can filter the MIDI channels
you want to listen to,
and obviously select the
controllers you want to observe.
In that case,
I want to observe controller 32 actually,
so I'm going to select 32 in the list.
And now we have a new output that
was generated with the 32 controller,
and I'm going to delete
the controller number 1.
It's opening a value that is
normalized between 0 and 1,
because it's more convenient than the 0,
1, 27 values that you usually
get from MIDI equipment.
So all I have to do is connect it there.
And now I can use my slider here,
and as you can see I control the
glow effect simply with this slider.
All right.
Let's do a little more.
So instead of using static image
or something that is generated
from some other compositions,
let's get some video in.
So I just used the
texture with video patch.
Here we go.
And I'm going to feed that on the,
let's say -- well, the cube,
the faces of the cube.
So what I have to do is connect this,
connect the texture output to the texture
input of the -- which was eventually
going to end up on my cube itself.
You can see there are several settings
you can set for video captures.
And I need to turn on the video camera,
I guess.
Let's try this.
Okay,
I might have to restart the composition.
So it detects the video input.
Okay, so now I have...
Pierre-Olivié Latour: Yeah, okay.
My last video input there
uncontrolled with the slider.
Yeah, OK.
Mine has video input there and
controlled with the slider.
I'm not sure if the camera
is connected or not,
is by the fact some object
is defined on the output.
For that, we could use a tool
that is the multiplexer.
The multiplexer is simply
a number of inputs.
And you select,
by using the source index input,
you select which one of these inputs
is going to be forwarded to the output.
So in that case,
I'm going to set the multiplexer
to manipulate texture objects,
reduce the number of inputs to only two,
Connect the output of the Mixiplexer to
the input of my rendering textures thing,
Macro.
[Transcript missing]
"So, I'm going to connect it there.
Okay.
And I can change the text, like no video.
I have no video on my Q.
How would I – so it's easy, you know,
you just – if I turn on
back the video camera there.
Is it running?
Okay.
And I restart.
Now, by changing the input,
I'm going to get either the
video input or the text.
Now, we would like, obviously,
that to be done automatically.
There is one little hack
you can use to do that.
It's simply using – let's see.
It is conditional or logic.
Here we go.
Because you can actually
connect an object,
like a texture or something like that,
to a Boolean input.
And basically if there is an object,
the Boolean input is going to be set
to true and if there is no object,
it's going to be set to false.
So here I have a simple patch which is
doing a logic comparison between two
Booleans and I'm going to use that.
So I'm going to set it to OR comparison,
set the second input to true.
So it always pass and connect the
texture object to the input there.
So what we have now is
On that output, I'm going to have true if
there is a texture coming,
or false if there is no texture.
And I can take that Boolean and
connect it to an index input,
and true is simply
going to translate to 1,
and false is going to translate to 0,
which is exactly what I need.
So now I've got a system that
is automatically defined,
and if I have a video camera connected,
I'm going to get the video camera image.
If I don't have a video camera connected,
I'm going to get the video picture.
Here we go.
Oops.
I kind of accelerated the thing.
Oh, I did it wrong.
Oh, that's right, that's right.
What did I do there?
"True, that is correct.
And there we go.
Oh, that's right.
You didn't pay attention there.
Here we go.
That's better."
So that was kind of an
interactive compositions.
And we can do the last thing
I'm going to show you is how to
have that composition respond to
the OpenGL render capabilities.
Because all that part here is
basically using Core Image.
And it's using it in hardware,
so it's only going to work if
you have a video card that is
supporting the proper extension set.
So what if the composition
is going to run on it?
Well,
it's not going to crash or anything,
but all this part here is
going to do strictly nothing.
So you might want to display
something else instead.
So let's go back to the tools,
and I have a convenient
OpenGL info patch,
which is returning me, for example,
the renderer vendor or renderer
name of the current renderer,
the version,
and can check also for the existence
of various OpenGL extensions.
The way you use it is that
you display the settings pane,
and you can add some fancy
extensions names here.
For example, I don't know,
my fancy extension.
OK, add it there.
And now you get a Boolean.
It's a Boolean output.
So if the extension is supported,
you get true.
If it's not supported, you get false.
So obviously GLARP vertex program
is supported on this computer.
Fragment program is also supported.
But my fancy extension, well,
is not supported for some reason.
So OK.
Now what I'm going to do is do a simple
comparison on the renderer version.
So that would be numeric
and then conditional.
So the renderer version is a number,
and in that case,
I think it's OpenGL 1.4.
And what I want to test is,
do we have an OpenGL renderer
that supports OpenGL 1.4 or later?
So I just do is greater
or equal than 1.4.
And you may have noticed that all the
consumer patches automatically have
an enable input added by the system,
which is a simple Boolean,
and you can turn on/turn off the
consumer patches from that input so that
enable input is at the top of the patch.
Now what I'm going to do is connect
my results to this enable input.
So as we can see,
it doesn't change anything because if you
see this video card support OpenGL 1.4.
Now what if for some reason I wanted
to test for the support of OpenGL 1.5?
Well, I would simply set 1.5 – oops,
I didn't even put the 1.4 there.
Here we go.
I would simply put 1.5 instead of 1.4.
"Greater or equal than." Okay,
and I must have done
something wrong here.
Oh, that's right.
That's pretty bad.
Here we go.
So now you can see that simply changing
The version you want to detect
for is going to turn off
dynamically parts of the data flow.
So it's important to – I'm
going to conclude on that,
that compositions you create are
absolutely not something that is closed.
You can really interact with them.
You can feed data in.
You can retrieve data from them.
They can be dynamically
responding to the environment.
And it's a great,
great system where you can
experiment with the brand new
technologies we are adding in
Tiger without typing a line of code.
And you can add them easily
to your applications.
Back to the slides, please.
So who you might want
to contact about this,
there is Travis Brown who
is our graphics and imaging
evangelist or possibly myself.
For more information,
you may want to look at
two documentations we have,
Visual Computing with Quartz Composer,
which is a simple introduction
followed by a tutorial,
which is pretty much the
tutorial we just did right there.
And the other documentation
is Image Processing with
a Core Image Framework,
and it actually contains an
extensive description of all the
filters provided by Core Image,
which are natively supported
by the Quartz Composer system.
You will also find the sample
code for the Quartz Composer
Player I demoed today,
which is going to be on the ADC website.
And you will also find some
demo compositions located into
developer examples Quartz Composer,
and you may obviously
look at the screen server.